## Definitions 

If media are everywhere, then they are difficult to define. For the purposes of this course, I define them as "congealed labour" or "techniques made durable." These definitions draw upon mediumship (where people are channels between realms or parties) and matter (where a medium is an intervening substance or transmission agent). Both definitions acknowledge the work of humans and nonhumans, and neither privileges a world of ideas or mental constructions. Media are social and material, in the middle, at once process and thing. Text, for example, renders durable the labour of reading and writing; it helps to reproduce them as techniques, shaping how language is expressed, and how it performs, through characters on paper and screen. *As a process, text habituates and affords*. It disciplines knowledge, perception, and memory while creating opportunities for play and experimentation. *As a thing, text saves and circulates*. It's a container and messenger. I may use text to document my thoughts and feelings, give them shape, let them congeal, and even compare and contrast versions of them. I can also send, publish, and reference text, especially when I want it to accrue value. Yet, perhaps most interesting, text never captures any relation completely or exactly. No media are total records. 

Media are often qualified, too: analogue, digital, print, electronic, old, or new media, for instance. I mostly avoid these adjectives in this course to focus instead on the broader categories of sound, image, and text, each of which can be any and all of the above.  
