# English 506 (Special Topic): "Media Aesthetics, Medium Theory"

**Draft description** 

This graduate seminar introduces you to comparative media studies, which involves design, creation, history, and analysis across media forms and practices. Our fundamental questions for the term will be, "How is communication mediated, and what can we learn from experimental media?" You will have opportunities to build a vocabulary for media studies, articulate your own working theory of communication, trace some experimental techniques, and write with (and not just about) media. The seminar is intended for anyone who is curious about media studies, and it should be useful for students who are researching the material dimensions of language, communication, literature, or culture. It is structured around two core concepts: media aesthetics and medium theory.

W.J.T. Mitchell proposed "medium theory" in a Winter 2004 issue of *Critical Inquiry*. According to Mitchell, medium theory would engage culture somewhere between the general and the particular. It would be of and in the middle, neither soaring above lived experience nor reduced to opinions or hunches. It would demonstrate methodological self-consciousness yet acknowledge the wicked mess and inescapable mediation of that very demonstration. Of course, the risk of medium theory is that it may compromise too much. Insufficiently distant and inadequately close, it evokes a theory on the 13th floor; if it exists, then is it hapless? This seminar puts such concerns to the test. It is a laboratory, if you will, for Mitchell's thesis.

We will begin with a survey of key terms, from medium, media, and material to intermedia, transmedia, post-media, anti-media, new media, elemental media, tactical media, residual media, remediation, premediaton, infrastructure, immediacy, icon, index, symbol, format, and boundary object. We will also assess the aims of approaches such as exegesis, hermeneutics, symptomatics, medium specificity, media ecology, media culture, and media archaeology.

We will then transition to the tradition (from Hermes and Iris forward) of media as messengers: carriers of words, means of transmission, containers of information. This tradition is mostly about the linguistic and material dimensions of everyday communications, especially presence and certainty. We will open it to alternative readings, where the message is not received: inefficiency prevails, the letter is purloined, the signal is noisy, the tape rots, the image morphs, the data degrades, the video buffers, the system malfunctions. Instead of asking what such media mean or how to define them, we will consider what they do and, if you're so inclined, what they want.

After our survey of media and media studies, we will spend a bulk of the seminar discussing media aesthetics, where media and communication are irreducible to means (such as text, image, or audio) or modes (such as seeing, listening, watching, reading, or touching). They are indeed somewhere in the middle: abstract relations and ephemeral techniques made durable. And they are made durable through, for instance, repetition, automation, inscription, dissemination, exchange, maintenance, and repurposing.

To better understand media aesthetics, we will study some, but not all, of the following experimental techniques, spending most of our time in the 19th and 20th centuries: anachronism (Ishmael Reed), blank space (Stéphane Mallarmé), collage (Mina Loy), defamiliarization (Viktor Shklovsky), détournement (Guy Debord), diary (Phoebe Gloeckner), disintegration (Robert Smithson), epigraph (W.E.B. Du Bois), esolangs (Keymaker), generative systems (Sonia Landy Sheridan), glitching (Jodi), granular synthesis (Iannis Xenakis), hypertext (Judy Malloy), looping (Pamela Z), machinima (Skawennati), montage (Hito Steyerl), mourning blocks (Laurence Sterne), protocols (Postcommodity), prototyping (Brendan Keogh), ratiocination (Edgar Allan Poe), redaction (Jenny Holzer), reflection (Maya Lin), repetition (Laurie Anderson), reverb (King Tubby), scratching (Grand Wizzard Theodore), selfies (Alison Bechdel), slideshows (Nan Goldin), soundwalks (Christine Sun Kim), superimposition (Maya Deren), and zine-making (Nathalie Lawhead). Our studies will combine samples with criticism: experimental techniques paired with an essay or excerpt. We will avoid treating the samples as objects and the criticism as authoritative; rather, we will focus on the apparatuses and processes that entwine creative and critical work.

I will provide you with a course reader and ask you to read 10-15 essays and study samples of 20-30 experimental works. I will also write an introduction to media aesthetics for your review at the beginning of the term. The introduction will build on and reference work by Charles Acland, Lynda Barry, Amaranth Borsuk, Walter Benjamin, Simone Browne, micha cárdenas, Wendy Hui Kyong Chun, Jonathan Crary, Mary Ann Doane, Johanna Drucker, Lori Emerson, Friedrich Engels, Kodwo Eshun, Anne Friedberg, Jacob Gaboury, Alexander Galloway, Lisa Gitelman, Richard Grusin, Aimi Hamraie, Miriam Hansen, N. Katherine Hayles, Erkki Huhtamo, Harold Innis, Patrick Jagoda, Immanuel Kant, Sarah Kember, Matthew Kirschenbaum, Bruno Latour, Jason Edward Lewis, Lydia Liu, Karl Marx, Shannon Mattern, Tara McPherson, Maurice Merleau-Ponty, Mara Mills, Shintaro Miyazaki, W.J.T. Mitchell, Laura Mulvey, Anna Munster, Lisa Nakamura, Alondra Nelson, Lisa Parks, Jussi Parikka, Allison Parrish, Charles Sanders Peirce, John Durham Peters, Rita Raley, Wolfgang Schivelbusch, Eve Sedgwick, Steven Shaviro, Susan Leigh Star, Nicole Starosielski, Jonathan Sterne, Whitney Trettien, Bernadette Wegenstein, Alexander Weheliye, Oscar Wilde, Kathy Woodward, Siegfried Zielinski, and Joanna Zylinska. That's a list. I will certainly not expect you to become familiar with it all. You will instead identify an area that interests you and pursue it.

Near the middle of the term, you will select an experimental technique (e.g., anachronism, looping, redaction, or superimposition) you consider important to media aesthetics. You will then produce an annotated bibliography (15%) of media studies publications relevant to your selected technique. Next you will articulate a genealogy (20%) of the technique, identifying stress points in its permutation over time. Finally, you will use medium theory to compose an argument about your technique. Here, I will ask you to write with (and not just about) media. I'll point you to examples of such work appearing in journals like *Vectors*, *American Literature*, *Cinema Journal*, *Thresholds*, *Places*, and *Kairos: Rhetoric, Technology, and Pedagogy*. You will present your argument as an end-of-term talk (20%) and seminar paper (35%). I will also ask you to co-facilitate (10%) one seminar meeting with me. By the term's end, you should be familiar with various frameworks for media studies and also quite knowledgeable about a specific technique made durable.
